Title: Cultured Butter
Pub date: March 24, 2014
Category: Condiments, Recipes, 

<div class="post-content main">

Makes about 12 ounces butter and 1½ cups buttermilk

<em>The flavor of pasteurized cream is preferable to ultra-pasteurized. Also, choose yogurt that contains live cultures. You can store the thickened, cultured cream up to 5 days in the refrigerator until you are ready to make the butter; let it sit at room temperature until it reaches about 60 degrees before proceeding with step 3. The reserved buttermilk is great for both cooking and drinking. The butter will keep for at least 1 month assuming you use reasonably fresh cream and you wash the butter well in step 5; the buttermilk will keep for about 6 weeks. Both the buttermilk and butter can be frozen as well. When thawed, the buttermilk will look separated; just give it a good shake.</em>

1 quart good-quality heavy cream (see note)
⅓ cup whole-milk plain yogurt (see note)
¼ teaspoon sea salt or kosher salt (optional)

1. To culture the cream: Combine cream and yogurt in large Mason jar, or similar glass container with tight-fitting lid, cover, and shake briefly to combine. Remove lid, cover jar with clean kitchen towel, and place in warm area, ideally around 75 degrees, and leave undisturbed until cultured and thickened, 18 to 24 hours. (Its texture should be similar to yogurt; if not, allow it to continue sitting, checking every 4 to 6 hours, until properly thickened.)

2. Once cream has thickened, remove kitchen towel, cover container with lid, and transfer to refrigerator to cool until mixture registers 60 degrees on instant-read thermometer, about 2 hours.

3. To make the butter: Place 4 cups of ice water in refrigerator. Pour chilled cultured cream into work bowl of standing mixer fitted with whisk attachment. Cover opening between  work bowl and mixer with plastic wrap to prevent splatter. Whip cream on high speed until it separates into buttermilk and clumps of small, yellow beads of butter, about 5 minutes. Strain butter through cheesecloth-lined fine mesh strainer set over large bowl, and let drain 1 minute.

4. Gather edges of cheesecloth and twist to squeeze butter, pushing down from top to bottom and letting buttermilk drip into bowl below until no more buttermilk is released. Transfer butter to large clean bowl; reserve buttermilk for another use.

5. Pour about ⅓ cup of ice water over butter and, with butter resting in water, fold butter against side of bowl, letting water wash over butter to rinse it of any remaining buttermilk. Discard milky liquid, and repeat washing process until water remains clear, about 6 washes. After final wash, discard any water in bowl, and smash and fold butter against side of bowl to squeeze out any remaining liquid; discard liquid. Sprinkle butter with salt, if using, and fold into butter until thoroughly incorporated.

6. Divide butter between two 12 by 15-inch pieces of parchment paper or waxed paper. Using your hands, form each portion into rough log shape. Fold top of paper over butter, then roll butter log back and forth until smooth and round and reaches desired length and thickness. (Alternatively, after folding paper over butter, use straight edge to push against top portion of paper to coax butter into tidy log of desired length and thickness.) Store butter, wrapped in paper, in refrigerator for about 1 month.

</div>
<em>for more detailed info and pics:
</em>http://www.americastestkitchenfeed.com/recipes/homemade-cultured-butter/
____

03/27/14
Used 1/2 gallon of Snowville Creamery Whipping Cream and 2/3 cup Snowville Creamery 6% Plain Yogurt.It took 40 hours to culture at room temp.  Probable average around 72 degrees.
Kept in the fridge for two days.
Let sit out for a couple of hours, then used large mixer to churn when 57 degrees.
Resulted in 3 1/2 cups buttermilk + 24 oz butter
Needed a different cheesecloth.  It would not pass thru the ruhlman cloth.