Title: Southern Biscuits
Pub date: February 8, 2013
Category: Bread, Recipes, 

If making buttermilk biscuits use the buttermilk and baking soda.  If not, substitute milk for buttermilk and omit baking soda.
Can make up to a day ahead of time. Make dough night before for easy breakfast.
Bake half one day and half the next, for fresh biscuits two days in a row.

*Try 2 tsp baking powder and 1/2 baking soda
*Try When I go to cut them I pat them into a long narrow strip, just wide enough for my cutter. OR I roll the dough and made a large tube, the diameter like a glass of juice, wrap with plastic papper and refrigerated for 2 hours. This gave the dough time to rest, gluten will "calm down", and avoid any hard or dry result. When I took the dough out it was hard, thank you refrigeration time, so I was able to cut 1 inch circles with the knife. So easy and avoid rolling!
*make a double batch and froze the biscuits on a cookie sheet for two hours instead of baking immediately. After that I just popped them into a freezer bag. Now I just take out as many as I need and bake at 400c for 23 minutes. The come out perfectly.

2 cups unbleached all-purpose flour
1/4 teaspoon baking soda (omit if making non-buttermilk biscuits)
1 Tablespoon baking powder
1 Tablespoon sugar
1 teaspoon salt
1/3 cup shortening (I like 4 1/3 Tbs unsalted butter + 2 Tbs leaf lard)
3/4-1 cup buttermilk (or milk if making non-buttermilk biscuits)

Half Recipe
1 cup unbleached all-purpose flour
1/8 teaspoon baking soda (omit if making non-buttermilk biscuits)
1 1/2 tsp baking powder
1 1/2 tsp sugar
1/2 teaspoon salt
2 1/2 Tbsp shortening (I like 2 Tbs unsalted butter + 1/2 Tbs leaf lard)
6 Tbsp-1/2 cup buttermilk (or milk if making non-buttermilk biscuits)

Preheat oven to 450.

Sift together the dry ingredients in a medium bowl.

Cut in shortening.  (Cut butter into 1/4 inch cubes to make cutting in easier.)

Add the buttermilk, or milk,  and mix JUST until combined.  If it appears on the dry side add a bit more liquid.  Or if too wet add a bit of flour.

Turn dough out on floured surface.  Gently PAT (do NOT use rolling pin) the dough until it's about 1/2 inch thick.  Cut into rounds using a round cutter.  You can gently push, or knead, the scraps back together but then will be more tough and less flavorful than the first cutting.

Place biscuits in a cast-iron skillet.  If you like soft sides, place them touching one another.  If you like more crusty sides, place them about one inch apart (these will not rise as high as the biscuits placed touching each other). Brush with melted butter (?).

Bake 10-12 minutes or until light golden brown on top and bottom.

Notes from an allrecipes recipes:
This is a good basic biscuit recipe minus the sugar - adding sugar makes a biscuit a scone. I've been making biscuits every AM for 30+ years and I've found that it's really the techniques that make a good biscuit. Here's are my tried and true tips -
1)COLD, COLD, COLD ingredients and HOT, HOT, HOT oven (450 or 500)
2) After adding the milk, stir just until it mostly comes together. DO NOT KNEAD! Just turn the dough out and pat it into the thickness you desire. Overworking makes a very tough biscuit
3) Use a sharp biscuit cutter and don't twist it as you cut. This seals the edges and doesn't allow the biscuits to rise as much. Try to avoid using an improvised cutter as the edges may not be sharp enough.
4) I bake mine in a cast iron skillet with lots of melted butter. I throw a couple of TBL of butter in the skillet and place in the oven while it's pre-heating just until melted (not browned). I then place the biscuit top side done in the butter and flip it so the whole thing is covered.
5) Place biscuits so they're touching for high risers that are not browned on the sides, or slightly apart for less of a rise but browned sides. 12 min at 450 will yield a very tender, moist biscuit with the perfect little crunch on top and bottom.